centralise rose cylc docs (#1033)
ACCESS-Hive/access-hive.github.io: docs/models/run-a-model/rose-cylc.md

# Run models using Rose/Cylc

## About
The _Rose/Cylc_ workflow management tool consists of two components- the [_Cylc_](https://niwa.co.nz/environmental-information/cylc-suite-engine) task engine, developed by the New Zealand National Institute of Water and Atmospheric Research (NIWA), and the [_Rose_](https://www.metoffice.gov.uk/research/approach/modelling-systems/rose) framework developed by the UK Met Office (UKMO) which configures tasks for the _Cylc_ engine. A workflow comprised of set of tasks configured by _Rose_ to run with the _Cylc_ engine is officially called a "suite" or "workflow", depending on the version of _Cylc_. Here we refer to them as "configurations" for consistency across our different tools and avoid naming confusion as we move to _Cylc8_.

## Prerequisites

- **NCI account**<br> 
    Before running {{ model }}, you need to [Set Up your NCI Account](/getting_started/set_up_nci_account).

- **_MOSRS_ account**<br>

>     The [Met Office Science Repository Service (MOSRS)](https://code.metoffice.gov.uk) is a server run by the UK Met Office (UKMO) to support collaborative development with other partners organisations. MOSRS contains the source code and configurations for some model components in {{ model }} (e.g., the [UM](/models/model_components/atmosphere/#unified-model-um)).<br>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    The [Met Office Science Repository Service (MOSRS)](https://code.metoffice.gov.uk) is a server run by the UK Met Office (UKMO) to support collaborative development with other partners organisations. MOSRS contains the source code for some ACCESS model configurations and a MOSRS account is needed to run those configurations.
```

Reviewer: It's true, but I think that is a level of detail that a "common" user will not need. If a user is following this guide I think they will very likely not need to access `JULES` or `UM` code directly (but rather access a model configuration instead).

Author: Fair point. I'll leave it as `ACCESS model configurations`.

    To apply for a _MOSRS_ account, please contact your [local institutional sponsor](https://opus.nci.org.au/display/DAE/Prerequisites).
    {: #mosrs-account}

- **Join NCI projects**<br>
    Join the following projects by requesting membership on their respective NCI project pages:

    - [access](https://my.nci.org.au/mancini/project/access/join)
    - [hr22](https://my.nci.org.au/mancini/project/hr22/join)
    - [ki32](https://my.nci.org.au/mancini/project/ki32/join)
    - [ki32_mosrs](https://my.nci.org.au/mancini/project/ki32_mosrs/join)
    
    !!! tip
        To request membership for the _ki32_mosrs_ subproject, you need to:
        
        - already be member of the _ki32_ project
        {: style="list-style-type: disc"}
        - have a [MOSRS account](#mosrs-account)
        {: style="list-style-type: disc"}
 
## Connecting to Gadi

> You can run _Rose/Cylc_ either from a _Gadi_ login node, or via an [ARE VDI session](https://opus.nci.org.au/spaces/Help/pages/163250532/2.1.+Connecting+to+the+VDI). If you wish to use the Gadi login node, skip directly to the [Set up a persistent session](#set-up-a-persistent-session) section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can run _Rose/Cylc_ either from a _Gadi_ login node, or via an [ARE VDI session](https://opus.nci.org.au/spaces/Help/pages/163250532/2.1.+Connecting+to+the+VDI). If you wish to use the Gadi login node, skip directly to [Set up a persistent session](#set-up-a-persistent-session).
```

<div markdown id="x11-forwarding">
!!! warning "X11 Forwarding"

>     If you are going to connect via the terminal directly using SSH, it is recommended to connect with `ssh -X` to enable X11 forwarding. This allows the Rose and Cylc GUIs to be launched on your local machine.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    If you are going to connect via the terminal using SSH, it is recommended to connect with `ssh -X` to enable X11 forwarding. This allows the Rose and Cylc GUIs to be launched on your local machine.
```

```
mosrs-auth
```
<terminal-window>
    <terminal-line data="input">mosrs-auth</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line lineDelay=500><span style="color: #559cd5;">INFO</span>: You need to enter your MOSRS credentials here so that GPG can cache your password.</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line>Please enter the MOSRS password for &lt;MOSRS-username&gt;:</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line lineDelay=1500>Checking your credentials using Subversion. Please wait.</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line lineDelay=500><span style="color: #559cd5;">INFO</span>: Successfully accessed Subversion with your credentials.</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line lineDelay=100><span style="color: #559cd5;">INFO</span>: Checking your credentials using rosie. Please wait.</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line lineDelay=500><span style="color: #559cd5;">INFO</span>: Successfully accessed rosie with your credentials.</terminal-line>
</terminal-window>

This will request the username and password you received when you created your MOSRS account.

### Get the model configuration

> Next, retrieve the model configuration you want to run from a remote host. Depending on the specific model configuration, the host is _Github_ or _MOSRS_. The [Run a Model](https://docs.access-hive.org.au/models/run-a-model/) documentation for the specific model will specify which source to use for that configuration. Regardless of where the configuration comes from, it is recommended to store them in `~/roses/` (this happens automatically for configurations pulled from MOSRS).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Depending on the specific model, its configuration will be hosted either on _Github_ or _MOSRS_. The [Run a Model](https://docs.access-hive.org.au/models/run-a-model/) documentation for the specific model will specify where the configuration is stored.<br>
Regardless where the remote configuration comes from, it is recommended to store the local copy in the `~/roses/` folder (this happens automatically for configurations pulled from MOSRS).
```

### Model configurations stored on Github

For Github hosted configurations, the Run a Model documentation will specify the `repository` and `branch` which host the configuration. From the `~/roses` directory, clone the repository from Github with:

```
git clone <repository> -b <branch>
```

### Model configurations stored on MOSRS

For MOSRS hosted configurations, the Run a Model documentation will specify the `suite-id` and `branch` which host the configuration. Some MOSRS hosted configurations will be comprised of multiple suites e.g. rAM3, in which case multiple `<suite-id>` and `<branch>` will be specified. There are two ways to pull a configuration from MOSRS. The simplest way is with:
#### rosie checkout

```
rosie checkout <suite-id>
```

This creates a local copy of the configuration, which is placed in the `~/roses/<suite-id>` folder. Use this command for testing and examining configurations.

> The second way is with:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Local and remote copy (new remote configuration)] {: #rosie-copy }
```

```
rosie copy <suite-id>
```

The creates a local copy of the configuration **and a remote copy of the configuration
The configuration will be placed in the `~/roses/<suite-id>` folder.

## Run the model configuration

To run the configuration, execute the following command from within the configuration directory:

```
rose suite-run
```

This launches the _Rose/Cylc_ configuration and opens the _Cylc_ GUI (if you are running on the login node and the GUI doesn't appear, make sure you connected with [X11 forwarding](#x11-forwarding) enabled). If you closed the GUI but want to re-open it, navigate to the configuration directory and run:

```
rose suite-gcontrol &
```

!!! tip
    The `&` is optional. It detaches the invoked process, allowing the terminal prompt to remain active while the GUI is open.

> By default, the configuration, log files and outputs are copied to `/scratch/<project>/${USER}/cylc-run/<suite-id>`. See the respective model documentation for details on what outputs are generated and where to find them that directory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, the configuration, log files and outputs are copied to `/scratch/<project>/${USER}/cylc-run/<suite-id>`. See the respective model documentation for details on what outputs are generated and where to find them.
```

A set of tasks configured by _Rose_ to run with the _Cylc_ engine is called a _suite_ (for _Cylc 7_) or _workflow_ (for _Cylc 8_).
## Prerequisites

- **NCI account**<br> 
    Before running {{ model }}, you need to [Set Up your NCI Account](/getting_started/set_up_nci_account).

- **_MOSRS_ account**<br>
    The [Met Office Science Repository Service (MOSRS)](https://code.metoffice.gov.uk) is a server run by the UK Met Office (UKMO) to support collaborative development with other partners organisations. MOSRS contains the source code for some ACCESS model components and configurations, and a MOSRS account is needed to run those configurations.<br>
    To apply for a _MOSRS_ account, please contact your [local institutional sponsor](https://opus.nci.org.au/display/DAE/Prerequisites).
    {: #mosrs-account}

> 

Author: Is that statement about it being a license requirement for any ACCESS configuration true? Even for OMx which have no UKMO components?

> 

Reviewer: No, I think it should be changed to:
```diff
- to run any ACCESS configuration.
+ to run some ACCESS configurations.
```

> 

Reviewer 2: I agree that what I had is not precise enough.

</div>

### Launch ARE VDI Desktop

!!! tip
    The ARE VDI session does not run configuration tasks directly; it only runs _Rose/Cylc_. The configuration tasks are dispatched by _Cylc_ to the compute nodes. This means the ARE VDI session requires minimal CPU and memory resources.

The following options are recommended for your ARE VDI desktop session:

- **Walltime (hours)** &rarr; `2`<br>
    Amount of hours the ARE VDI session will remain active for. This is only setup time, and does not reflect how long the actual configuration will take to run.

- **Queue** &rarr; `normalbw`
    
- **Compute Size** &rarr; `tiny` (1 CPU)<br>

- **Project** &rarr; a project of which you are a member.<br>
    The project must have allocated [_Service Units (SU)_](https://opus.nci.org.au/spaces/Help/pages/236881132/Allocations...) to run your simulation. By default, this will be set to your default project `$PROJECT`.

- **Storage** &rarr; `gdata/access+gdata/hr22+gdata/ki32` (minimum)<br>
    The storage folders listed above are the minimum required to run _Rose/Cylc_.

> 

Reviewer: @Whyborn 
`scratch/$PROJECT+gdata/hr22` should be working fine for ACCESS-rAM3 as well, as confirmed by Chermelle in [this Zulip topic](https://access-nri.zulipchat.com/#narrow/channel/470344-regional-model-release/topic/storage.20for.20ARE/with/553975259).

> 

Author: Ok, I'll update based on this and assume it's correct until someone can demonstrate otherwise

Once the ARE VDI session opens in your browser, click the terminal icon at the top of the window to open a terminal. Use this terminal for all subsequent steps in this guide.

## Set up a persistent session

NCI provides a service called [_persistent sessions_](https://opus.nci.org.au/spaces/Help/pages/241926895/Persistent+Sessions) to enable long running processes, like _Cylc_, to stay active even when the user disconnects from _Gadi_. 

> 

Reviewer 2: Should include the information that one persistent session per user is enough and recommended.

```suggestion
## Set up a persistent session

NCI provides a service called [_persistent sessions_](https://opus.nci.org.au/spaces/Help/pages/241926895/Persistent+Sessions) to enable long running processes, like _Cylc_, to stay active even when the user disconnects from _Gadi_. 

It is recommended to only have one active persistent session at any one time as several _Cylc_ sessions can use the same persistent session.

Note that persistent sessions are terminated during the quaterly maintenance at NCI and will need to be restarted afterwards. The new persistent session can be given the same name as used previously.

```

The newly created persistent session is assigned a unique identifier, referred to here as `<persistent-session-uuid>`.

### Assign the persistent session to Cylc {: .no-toc }

Once the session is running, it needs to be assigned to _Cylc_. This is done by inserting the persistent session label into `~/.persistent-sessions/cylc-session`, which can be done with the following command (substituting `<name>` and `<project>` for the name and project used to create the persistent session).

```
cat > ~/.persistent-sessions/cylc-session <<< "<name>.${USER}.<project>.ps.gadi.nci.org.au"
```

You can check that this worked with:

```
cat ~/.persistent-sessions/cylc-session
```

For example, if user `abc123` started a persistent session named `CM2` under the project `tm70`, then the command would be:

<terminal-window data="input">
    <terminal-line>cat > ~/.persistent-sessions/cylc-session <<< CM2.abc123.tm70.ps.gadi.nci.org.au</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line data="input" linedelay="1000">cat ~/.persistent-sessions/cylc-session</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line data="output">CM2.abc123.tm70.ps.gadi.nci.org.au</terminal-line>
</terminal-window>

> 

Reviewer: I agree for not using a name tied to a model. 

For the permanently open persistent session, I think that's exactly the purpose of it. Until there's no cost associated I think that's fine. If a cost will be added, I think NCI should also provide a way to gracefully end the session after some (reasonably long) time, or for example after an amount of time for which it didn't detect any process running in it.

> 

Reviewer 2: > to have a permanent persistent session

Note that I never suggested this. What I suggest is for people to only have at most one active session at any given time. And people can re-use the same name again and again for their next session when one dies. This way they have nothing to change in their settings.

> 

Reviewer 2: I don't think there will be cost associated. At the start, we had a project associated with SU for the permanent sessions but it turns out the usage is small enough, it's not needed. If it starts ballooning for some unknown reason, I suspect the cost might be covered by us and not the users.

### List active persistent sessions {: .no-toc }

To list currently active sessions, use:

```
persistent-sessions list
```
### Terminate a persistent sessions {: .no-toc }

To end a specific session, use:

```
persistent-sessions kill <persistent-session-uuid>
```

## Rose/Cylc Setup

### Rose and Cylc executables

Make the `rose` and `cylc` executables available by loading the _Cylc_ module:

```
module use /g/data/hr22/modulefiles

> module load cylc7

Author: So _Cylc8_ is different enough that we shouldn't simply have them be separate sections at the bottom of this doc? I'm imagining everything up to the "Run the model configuration" section would be the same across Cylc7 and 8.

> module load cylc7

Reviewer: I think for the moment we don't have released model configurations running with _Cylc 8_, so my suggestion is to address the current page to _Cylc 7_ and worry about _Cylc 8_ when the time comes, as now we can't know exactly all the differences.

> module load cylc7

Author: I think it does add useful information. A user who has been using a _Cylc7_ configuration, that gets ported to _Cylc8_, will find that the thing they'd been doing in the past no longer works. If they are aware that such a change is coming, then when the configuration stops working, they will (hopefully) remember "Ah this might be due to the _Cylc8_ port, I'll go check the docs again and try the _Cylc8_ instructions.". If they don't know to expect a change, then it's more likely to lead to frustration and wasted time trying to debug the problem.

> module load cylc7

Author: > How can we write/plan a page about things we still don't know about?

It doesn't have to contain any information about how to use _Cylc8_, simply information that we are in the process of transitioning some configurations to _Cylc8_.

> a configuration won't just "stop working" because it has been ported to Cylc8

But a workflow someone had used in the past will stop working- they'll `git clone <repo> -b <branch>`, try their old _Cylc7_ workflow and find it failing (I assume based off this conversation the commands will be different?). I'm not sure what the error messages will show in this instance, but I want one of the first thoughts the user has to be "I'll go check whether the configuration has been ported to _Cylc8_".

How will the users be advised? I think any advising via the Hive docs or forum will take time to reach everyone interested. Even if we email everyone directly, there'd still be people who miss it.

> module load cylc7

Reviewer: I understand your concerns. 
What do you think would be a good approach to let users be informed about these potential future changes?
Is there anything else we could do now other than writing an alert message about future _Cylc8_ at the beginning of this page?

> module load cylc7

Reviewer 2: @Whyborn Sounds good. Change `concretized` to `finalised`?

> module load cylc7

Author: Are all our _Rose/Cylc_ things moving to _Cylc8_?

> module load cylc7

Reviewer: Not sure.

> module load cylc7

Author: I think the wording of this will depend on whether everything is moving to _Cylc8_, or only a subset. If everything is moving to _Cylc8_, then I agree with your suggested wording.

> module load cylc7

Reviewer: I don't think we can have knowledge of that right now. 
In general, even if we end up not moving some configurations, I think the wording is good enough for people to understand what might be coming.

> module load cylc7

Author: What about changing

> ACCESS model configurations that currently run using Rose/Cylc rely on Cylc 7, with plans to upgrade to Cylc 8

to

> ACCESS model configurations that currently run using Rose/Cylc rely on Cylc 7, with intentions to upgrade all configurations to Cylc 8

The first wording implies that we are quite sure it's going to happen (to me), whereas the second makes it clear that they may not all make that transition.

> module load cylc7

Reviewer: If the word "plans" conveys more certainty to you than "intentions" we can swap those. However, I wouldn't add "all configurations" because we don't know that. 

> ACCESS model configurations that currently run using Rose/Cylc rely on Cylc 7, with the intention to upgrade to Cylc 8

    <terminal-line>Please enter the MOSRS password for &lt;MOSRS-username&gt;:</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line lineDelay=1500>Checking your credentials using Subversion. Please wait.</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line lineDelay=500><span style="color: #559cd5;">INFO</span>: Successfully accessed Subversion with your credentials.</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line lineDelay=100><span style="color: #559cd5;">INFO</span>: Checking your credentials using rosie. Please wait.</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line lineDelay=500><span style="color: #559cd5;">INFO</span>: Successfully accessed rosie with your credentials.</terminal-line>
</terminal-window>

## Get the model configuration

Depending on the the specific model, its configuration will be hosted either on _Github_ or _MOSRS_. The [Run a Model](https://docs.access-hive.org.au/models/run-a-model/) documentation for the specific model will specify where the configuration is stored.<br>

Regardless of where the configuration comes from, it is recommended to store the local copy in the `~/roses/` (this happens automatically for configurations pulled from MOSRS).

> ### Model configurations stored on Github

Author: Why is it important for people that want to change configurations? You can change configurations with a `rosie checkout`, just not push them back to the remote.

> ### Model configurations stored on Github

Author: Personally I think contributing back and running a model should be separate considerations, but I'll cede on this. But I don't think this addresses the need for more _ROSE_/`rosie` documentation- there should be documentation on good practices to follow when contributing back to the MOSRS repository.

> ### Model configurations stored on Github

Reviewer: Most of the users aren't going to simply run a model for fun. Output data for the "default" configurations are already available. Users want to run the models to then modify things and potentially creating new configurations that they can manage or use for research. I think adding information on how to commit back to MOSRS here is very quick, easy and probably a very logical solution.

About having more documentation on Rose, why do you think more documentation is needed when there is Rose official documentation and MOSRS contribution practices documentation?
Also, this might change very soon as things are moved to GitHub, so I would not spend time trying to add these bits of documentation to the Hive Docs.

> ### Model configurations stored on Github

Author: Can you point me to those Rose and MOSRS documents so I can add links to them?

<div markdown id="x11-forwarding">
!!! warning "X11 Forwarding"
    If you are going to connect via the terminal directly using SSH, it is recommended to connect with `ssh -X` to enable X11 forwarding. This allows the Rose and Cylc GUIs to be launched on your local machine.
</div>

### Launch ARE VDI Desktop

!!! tip
    The ARE VDI session does not run configuration tasks directly; it only runs _Rose/Cylc_. The configuration tasks are dispatched by _Cylc_ to the compute nodes. This means the ARE VDI session requires minimal CPU and memory resources.

The following options are recommended for your ARE VDI desktop session:

- **Walltime (hours)** &rarr; `2`<br>
    Amount of hours the ARE VDI session will remain active for. This is only setup time, and does not reflect how long the actual configuration will take to run.

- **Queue** &rarr; `normalbw`
    
- **Compute Size** &rarr; `tiny` (1 CPU)<br>

- **Project** &rarr; a project of which you are a member.<br>
    The project must have allocated [_Service Units (SU)_](https://opus.nci.org.au/spaces/Help/pages/236881132/Allocations...) to run your simulation. By default, this will be set to your default project `$PROJECT`.

> - **Storage** &rarr; `gdata/access+gdata/hr22+gdata/ki32` (minimum)<br>

Reviewer 2: I have tested and AM3 config works from ARE with this storage flag: scratch/$PROJECT+gdata/hr22. I would be surprised access and ki32 would be requirements to launch the rAM3 suite but I don't know it. They are definitely requirements of tasks within the suite, but these are launched on PBS in their own shell and with their own storage flags.

Is it worth checking rAM3 and simplifying here if we can? We should definitely add scratch/$PROJECT to the list (given by default by ARE but we don't want users to remove it).

    The storage folders listed above are the minimum required to run _Rose/Cylc_.

Once the ARE VDI session opens in your browser, click the terminal icon at the top of the window to open a terminal. Use this terminal for all subsequent steps in this guide.

## Set up a persistent session

NCI provides a service called [_persistent sessions_](https://opus.nci.org.au/spaces/Help/pages/241926895/Persistent+Sessions) to enable long running processes, like _Cylc_, to stay active even when the user disconnects from _Gadi_. 

> 

Reviewer 2: Should include the information that one persistent session per user is enough and recommended.

```suggestion
## Set up a persistent session

NCI provides a service called [_persistent sessions_](https://opus.nci.org.au/spaces/Help/pages/241926895/Persistent+Sessions) to enable long running processes, like _Cylc_, to stay active even when the user disconnects from _Gadi_. 

It is recommended to have only one active persistent session at any given time as several _Cylc_ sessions can use the same persistent session.  

Note that persistent sessions are terminated during the quaterly maintenance at NCI and will need to be restarted afterwards. The new persistent session can be given the same name as used previously.  

```

The newly created persistent session is assigned a unique identifier, referred to here as `<persistent-session-uuid>`.

### Assign the persistent session to Cylc {: .no-toc }

Once the session is running, it needs to be assigned to _Cylc_. This is done by inserting the persistent session label into `~/.persistent-sessions/cylc-session`, which can be done with the following command (substituting `<name>` and `<project>` for the name and project used to create the persistent session).

```
cat > ~/.persistent-sessions/cylc-session <<< "<name>.${USER}.<project>.ps.gadi.nci.org.au"
```

You can check that this worked with:

```
cat ~/.persistent-sessions/cylc-session
```

For example, if user `abc123` started a persistent session named `CM2` under the project `tm70`, then the command would be:

<terminal-window data="input">
    <terminal-line>cat > ~/.persistent-sessions/cylc-session <<< CM2.abc123.tm70.ps.gadi.nci.org.au</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line data="input" linedelay="1000">cat ~/.persistent-sessions/cylc-session</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line data="output">CM2.abc123.tm70.ps.gadi.nci.org.au</terminal-line>

> </terminal-window>

Reviewer 2: I would avoid examples of names that seem tied to a specific model since we want to teach people to only have one session for everything:

```suggestion
For example, if user `abc123` started a persistent session named `ForCylc` under the project `tm70`, then the command would be:

<terminal-window data="input">
    <terminal-line>cat > ~/.persistent-sessions/cylc-session <<< ForCylc.abc123.tm70.ps.gadi.nci.org.au</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line data="input" linedelay="1000">cat ~/.persistent-sessions/cylc-session</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line data="output">ForCylc.abc123.tm70.ps.gadi.nci.org.au</terminal-line>
</terminal-window>
```

    <terminal-line>Please enter the MOSRS password for &lt;MOSRS-username&gt;:</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line lineDelay=1500>Checking your credentials using Subversion. Please wait.</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line lineDelay=500><span style="color: #559cd5;">INFO</span>: Successfully accessed Subversion with your credentials.</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line lineDelay=100><span style="color: #559cd5;">INFO</span>: Checking your credentials using rosie. Please wait.</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line lineDelay=500><span style="color: #559cd5;">INFO</span>: Successfully accessed rosie with your credentials.</terminal-line>
</terminal-window>

## Get the model configuration

Depending on the the specific model, its configuration will be hosted either on _Github_ or _MOSRS_. The [Run a Model](https://docs.access-hive.org.au/models/run-a-model/) documentation for the respective model will specify where the configuration is stored.<br>

Regardless of where the configuration comes from, it is recommended to store the local copy in the `~/roses/` directory (this happens automatically for configurations pulled from MOSRS).

> ### Model configurations stored on Github

Reviewer 2: For configurations on Rosie, we tell people how to back up their configurations by pushing back to Rosie. We don't for the GitHub ones. Should we think about adding something? Is that the best place and best time to put it?

    <terminal-line lineDelay=500><span style="color: #559cd5;">INFO</span>: Successfully accessed rosie with your credentials.</terminal-line>
</terminal-window>

## Get the model configuration

> Depending on the the specific model, its configuration will be hosted either on _Github_ or _MOSRS_. The [Run a Model](https://docs.access-hive.org.au/models/run-a-model/) documentation for the specific model will specify where the configuration is stored.<br>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Depending on the the specific model, its configuration will be hosted either on _Github_ or _MOSRS_. The [Run a Model](https://docs.access-hive.org.au/models/run-a-model/) documentation for the respective model will specify where the configuration is stored.<br>
```

Regardless of where the configuration comes from, it is recommended to store the local copy in the `~/roses/` (this happens automatically for configurations pulled from MOSRS).

### Model configurations stored on Github

For Github hosted configurations, get a local copy by cloning the Github repository with:

```
git -C ~/roses clone <repository> -b <branch>
```

where `<repository>` and `<branch>` are specific to the chosen model configuration and can be found in the respective [Run a Model documentation](https://docs.access-hive.org.au/models/run-a-model/).

### Model configurations stored on MOSRS

There are two ways of getting a local copy of a configuration hosted on MOSRS:

- [Local-only copy](#rosie-checkout)
- [Local and remote copy (new remote configuration)](#rosie-copy)

#### Local-only copy {: #rosie-checkout }

```
rosie checkout <suite-id>/<branch>
```

where `<suite-id>` and `<branch>` are specific to the chosen model configuration and can be found in he respective [Run a Model documentation](https://docs.access-hive.org.au/models/run-a-model/). This creates a local copy of the configuration, which is placed in the `~/roses/<suite-id>` folder.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
!!! tip
    The `/<branch>` portion of the command can be omitted to copy from the default branch (`trunk`).
```

Configurations obtained in this way cannot be pushed back to the remote, so use of this command is recommended for testing and examining configurations.

#### Local and remote copy (new remote configuration) {: #rosie-copy }

```
rosie copy <suite-id>
```

> where `<suite-id>` and `<branch>` are specific to the chosen model configuration and can be found in he respective [Run a Model documentation](https://docs.access-hive.org.au/models/run-a-model/). A text editor will open (by default, this will be Vim- if you haven't used Vim before, see [this quick guide](https://eastmanreference.com/a-quick-start-guide-for-beginners-to-the-vim-text-editor)) in the terminal, requesting that you specify the owner, project and title for the configuration. They should already be filled out with reasonable defaults, taken from the configuration being copied (bar the username, which will be your MOSRS username). It allows permits any other `key=value` pairs, which will also by default pulled from the configuration being copied.

Author: Slightly adjusted the wording in brackets- said "(by default, the editor is Vim- ...)", I think it's not 100% clear that "this" is the editor.

> where `<suite-id>` and `<branch>` are specific to the chosen model configuration and can be found in he respective [Run a Model documentation](https://docs.access-hive.org.au/models/run-a-model/). A text editor will open (by default, this will be Vim- if you haven't used Vim before, see [this quick guide](https://eastmanreference.com/a-quick-start-guide-for-beginners-to-the-vim-text-editor)) in the terminal, requesting that you specify the owner, project and title for the configuration. They should already be filled out with reasonable defaults, taken from the configuration being copied (bar the username, which will be your MOSRS username). It allows permits any other `key=value` pairs, which will also by default pulled from the configuration being copied.

Author: Also I think it's worth noting that `owner`, `project` and `title` are required fields (at least according to the prompt- I actually don't know if that's enforced?).
